---
title: Webpage Colour Themes
header: Webpage Colour Themes
---

### Problem
On one of my websites I decided it would be nice if the user had a choice in what colour 
theme the website used. I decided to have a look at how other websites did this and
came across [this](https://css-tricks.com/a-complete-guide-to-dark-mode-on-the-web/) 
article which explains some popular approaches.

### Goal
To start off with I would just want a theme that could toggle between light and dark. But
I wanted to the option to add more themes in the future.

### Solution
#### Changing the theme
The way that I would implement this was to use css variables and classes to change the 
colours used throughout the website.

I would start by defining a list of colour variables in my css that would be used by 
default. To get them to be used throughout the website they would be set under the :root. 
e.g.
```css
/* These variables will be accessible throughout the rest of the css */
:root {
    --colour-example-one: blue;
    --colour-example-two: red;
    --colour-example-three: green;
}
/* For example to change element colours  */
p {
    background: var(--colour-example-one);
}
```

Then I could override these variables to use a different colour pallet. I did this by
changing the class on the body element. Then by adding the corresponding css.
```css
/* A new theme can be created by specifying the class on the body element */
body.dark-theme {
    --colour-example-one: darkblue;
    --colour-example-two: darkred;
    --colour-example-three: darkgreen;
}
```
```javascript
// Changing the theme just requires adding the theme class to the body element
const page = document.body;
page.className = 'dark-theme';
```

You could then add an event onto an element of choice to trigger changing the theme.
This could be a toggle button, or a dropdown list.

#### Storing the theme
The choice of theme should be remembered to provide a consistent user experience, and to
stop the user having to manually change the theme every time they visit. The easiest way
to do this for my site was to just store the choice of theme in localStorage.
```javascript
// Setting the data
localStorage.setItem('theme', theme);

// Getting the data we need to make sure it's been set
let theme = localStorage.getItem('theme');
if (theme !== undefined) {
    page.className = theme;
}
```

#### Default value
When the user loads the website we need to decide what theme should be set. Originally I 
was just going to have this set to the theme stored in localStorage, or the dark theme if
nothing existed in storage. 

But I decided to also consider the users system theme, this can be accessed using the
[prefers-color-scheme](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@media/prefers-color-scheme) 
media feature. Below is an example of checking this in javascript, the values are either
dark or light.
```javascript
if (window.matchMedia && window.matchMedia('(prefers-color-scheme: light)').matches) {
    // Set light theme
} else {
    // Set dark theme
}
```

### Conclusion
This turned out to not be that hard to implement and was mainly focused around changing
classes and css values. 

The only thing I wasn't too sure about keeping was setting the 
default colour scheme from the users system theme. The reason being that most users will
probably just have the default light theme without really thinking about it. So if there
was a theme that the site looked a lot nicer in, then this should probably be the default
rather than the users system theme.

At the time of writing this the theme changing functionality is on this website, so feel
free to take a look.

